Chapter 1
Introduction


Background:
Government of India has passed Right to Information Act - 2005, which became
effective from June 15, 2005. Under this Act, every citizen has got right to
information. Keeping this in mind, this hand book has been prepared which deals
with all the information related to polytechnic education wing of Directorate of
Technical Education, Rajasthan, Jodhpur.


Objective / purpose:
To give all relevant information related with the Directorate of Technical Education,
Rajasthan (polytechnic wing) under Rights to Information Act 2005 to all the
citizens.


Users:
Student eligible to take admission in polytechnic colleges and their parents or
any citizen of India interested in Technical Education Rajasthan.


Definitions:
DTE: - Directorate of Technical Education, Rajasthan, Jodhpur
JDT - Joint Director, Technical Education, Rajasthan, Jodhpur
ADT :- Assistant Director, Technical Education, Rajasthan, Jodhpur


Contact Person:
State Level:
Sh. Alok Bansal, Joint Director
Directorate of Technical Education, Rajasthan
W-6, Gaurav Path, Residency Road,
Jodhpur-342032


Head Quarter Level
Sh. G.S. Sodha, Assistant Director
Directorate of Technical Education, Rajasthan
W-6, Gaurav Path, Residency Road,
Jodhpur-342032


First Appleallate Authority
Sh. P.C. Makwana, Director
Directorate of Technical Education, Rajasthan
W-6, Gourav Path, Residency Road,
Jodhpur-342032


Institution level:
Principal of the Polytechnic College


1.6 Procedure and fee structure for getting information:
1. Apply to Director, Technical Education, Rajasthan
Jodhpur.
2. Application fee is rupees ten only (Rs. 10/-)
3. Additional information other than the information available
in Handbook can be obtained on the following fees:
(i) A4/A3 paper size or photocopy @ Rs. 2/- per page
(i) Actual cost of big size page.
(iii) For the checking of records, there is no fee for first one
hour and there after it will be Rs.5/- per 15 minutes
duration or its part.


Chapter — 2
Particulars of Organization, Functions and Duties


Objectives:
Development, management and inspection of Technical Institutions
(Polytechnic College) in the State and policy making on all related matters of
diploma technical education.


Mission Statement:
To be a world class organization, leading to technological advancement in
Rajasthan by enhancing the global competitiveness of manpower and by ensuring
access of high quality technical education to all sections of the society.


Vision: Enhancing the employability of the youth.


Brief history:
In pursuance of the recommendation of A.I.C.T.E., the State Government
set up the Directorate of Technical Education in August,1956, having its
headquarter at Jodhpur with the objectives to plan, organize and execute
the programmes of Technical Education at diploma level and work as a link
between engineering colleges and the State Government.


Duties of the DTE:
To advise the State Government on all matters related to policy making,
planning for the development, management and expansion of technical
education in Rajasthan.


Main activities / functions:
The Directorate is primarily responsible for providing technical educational,
financial and administrative management of all Polytechnic Colleges and
other Diploma level Institutions under the overall policy guidelines laid down
by the State Government.


List of services being provided:
1. Policy making for growth of technical education in Rajasthan
2. Planning for the integrated development of diploma level technical
education in Rajasthan
3. Financial and administrative management of technical education in the
State.
4. Review of technical education in the State.


Organizational Structure:
State Level — Principal Secretary, Deptt. of Technical Education, Rajasthan
with Joint Secretary-I and Joint Secretary-Il, Technical Education to assist.
Directorate — Director, Technical education, Rajasthan, with Joint Directors,
Assistant Directors to assist
Polytechnics - Principal, Polytechnic College, with Heads of Departments,
Senior Lecturers and Lecturers to assist.


Expectation of the DTE from the public for enhancing its effectiveness and
efficiency:
Public is requested to make the best use of the information given by the
Directorate of Technical Education, Rajasthan regarding admissions in
various diploma programmes.
Public is also requested to play the role of guardian in most effective manner
so that we may be able to produce the best technicians in the world.


Arrangements and methods for seeking public participation / contribution:
Career exhibitions and fairs at Public places and schools.


Mechanism available for monitoring the service delivery and public
grievance resolution:
Public may contact the contact person in DTE for related service and
grievance redressal.


Addresses of the Head Office and Polytechnic Colleges:
Head Office:
Directorate of Technical Education, Rajasthan
W-6, Gourav Path,Jodhpur-342032


Institution level:
Principal
Govt. Polytechnic Colleges at Ajmer / Alwar / Banswara/ Barmer/
Bikaner/ Bharatpur/ Churu/ Chittorgarh/ Kota/ Jaipur/ Jodhpur/
Pali/ Sirohi / Sri Ganganagar/ Sawai Madhopur/Rajsamand/ Sikar/
Neemrana / Jhalawar / Dausa/ Pratapgarh/ Dungerpur /Dholpur/Baran
Jaisalmer/ Jalore (camp-Pail) / karauli (camp-Alwar) / Tonk/ Bundi /
Hanumangarh / Bhilwara / Jhunjhunu / Bagidora/ Nagaur/ Kelwara/
Udaipur/ Mandore (Camp-Jodhpur)/ Pilani (Camp-Jhunjhunu)/ Uchhain
(Camp-Bharatpur) and Nawa (Camp-Nagaur)


Principal
Govt. Mahila Polytechnic Colleges at
Ajmer/ Bikaner/ Jaipur/ Jodhpur/ Kota/ Udaipur/ Sanganer (Jaipur)/Bharatpur


Opening hours of the office: 9:30 A.M., Closing hours: 6:00 P.M.
Opening hours of Polytechnics: 10:00 A.M., Closing hours: 5:00 P.M.
Summer hours ( April 1 to June 30): 7.30 A.M. to 1.30 P.M.


Chapter - 4
Rules, Regulations, Instructions, Manual and
Records for Discharging Functions


Rules, regulations, instructions, manual and records held by Directorate of
Technical Education and used by its employees for discharging functions:


Name / title of the document: Manual of Norms and Duties for DTE ( Education wing)


Brief Write-up on the Document:
It gives detailed norms and duties of staff of technical education.


From where one can get a copy of
Head Office:
Sh. Alok Bansal, Joint Director
Directorate of Technical Education, Rajasthan
W-6, Gaurav Path,Residency Road,
Jodhpur-342032
Telephone No: 0291-2434395, 2434271 Fax: 0291-2430398
Email: dte_raj@rajasthan.gov.in


Institution level:
Principal, Polytechnic Colleges


Fee charged by the department for a copy of rules, regulations, instructions, manual and
records:


Application fee is rupees ten only (Rs. 10/-)
Additional information other than the information available in Handbook can be
obtained on the following fees.
A4/A3 paper size or photo copy @ Rs.2/- per page
Actual cost of big size page.
For the checking of records there is no fee for first one hour and thereafter it will
be Rs.5/- per 15 minutes duration or its part.


Chapter — 6
The names, designations and other particulars of the Public Information Officers:


6.1 Contact information about the Public Information Officers, Assistant Public
Information Officers and Departmental Appellate Authority:


State Level:
Sh. Alok Bansal, Joint Director
Directorate of Technical Education, Rajasthan
W-6, Gaurav Path, Residency Road,
Jodhpur-342032


Head Quarter Level
Sh. G.S. Sodha, Assistant Director
Directorate of Technical Education, Rajasthan
W-6, Gaurav Path, Residency Road,
Jodhpur-342032


First Appleallate Authority
Sh. P.C. Makwana, Director
Directorate of Technical Education, Rajasthan
W-6, Gaurav Path, Residency Road,
Jodhpur-342032


6.2 Contact information about the Public Information Officer:


Institution level:
Public Information Officers
Principal, Polytechnic College
Details are as follows:


Appellate Authority:
Director,
Technical Education, Rajasthan
W-6, Gaurav Path, Residency Road,
Jodhpur - 342 032
Phone No. 0291 - 2434395


Chapter —7
Procedure followed in Decision Making Process


Procedure followed in taking decisions:
First the dealing clerk put the matter with noting on file to office superintendent then
office superintendent put the matter to the ADTE. After proper study it is put up
before JDTE. JDTE after giving his opinion put up the matter before Director for final
decision.
Necessary approvals on policy matters are taken from Principal Secretary,
Technical Education, Rajasthan.


Defined Criteria / Rules to arrive at a particular decision for important matters
& levels through which a decision process moves:
First the dealing clerk put the matter with noting on file to office superintendent, then
office superintendent put the matter to the ADTE. After proper study ,it is put up
before JDTE. JDTE after giving his opinion puts- up the matter before Director for
final decision.
Necessary approvals on policy matters are taken from Principal Secretary,
Technical Education, Rajasthan, Jaipur.


Arrangements to communicate the decision to the public:
Through News papers, Notice board, Websites.


7.4 The officers whose opinion is sought for the process of decision making:
First the dealing clerk put the matter with noting on file to office superintendent then
office superintendent put the matter to the ADTE. After proper study ,it is put up
before JDTE. JDTE after giving his opinion put up the matter before Director for final
decision.
Necessary approvals on policy matters are taken from Principal Secretary,
Technical Education, Rajasthan.


7.5 The final authority that vets the decision:
For Implementation purpose: Director, Technical Education, Rajasthan.
For policy matters: Principal Secretary, Technical Education, Rajasthan.


Chapter — 9
Information available in Electronic Form


The following information is available in Electronic Form on the website of Directorate
of Technical Education, Rajasthan, Jodhpur ( http:/dte.rajasthan.gov.in ):


R.T.I Information Hand Book
Admission Forms - Engg. /Non-Engg. Courses/Second Year Engg. through
Lateral Entry
District-wise Facilities of Technical Education
Year-wise growth of Tech. Institutions in Rajasthan.
Student transfer policy
Operational plan of TTC & LRDC and NITTTR trainings
Tender information
List of Equipments, Furniture
Seniority Lists
Departmental Rules


Chapter — 10
AICTE Norms for Diploma Level Technical Institutions


As per the advt. no. 12(05)/2010 and notification no. 37-3/legal/'2011 dated 10.12.2010,
AICTE has taken back the powers delegated to the State Governments on behalf of
AICTE viz. processsing of applications for establishment of new diploma level technical
institutions/ extension of approvals etc.
Now the online processsing of applications will be done at the level of AICTE.
Other information / details can be had from AICTE website http://www.aicte-india.org


Chapter — 11
Facilities available to citizens for obtaining information


12.1 Means, methods or facilitation available to the public for dissemination of
information:
Office Library
Notice Board
Inspection of Records in the Office on request
Manual Available
Website of DTE: http:/dte.rajasthan.gov.in
Email Address: dte_raj@rajasthan.gov.in


Chapter — 12
Other Useful Information


13.1 Frequently Asked Questions:


Queries about admissions:
All details about admissions are given in admission form which is available at
Departmen Website


Opening of new Institutes:
All details about opening of new institutes are available on AICTE website
http://lwww.aicte-india.org


13.2 Procedure for seeking Information on:


i ) Application form
ii ) Fee structure


Apply to Director, Technical Education, Rajasthan Jodhpur.
Application fee is rupees ten only (Rs. 10/-)
Additional information other than the information available in Handbook can be
obtained on the following fees:
1. A4/ A3 paper size or photo copy @ Rs.2/- per page
2. Actual cost of big size page.
For the checking of records, there is no fee for first one hour and there after it will be
Rs.5/- per 15 minutes duration or its part.


In case of denial of information, appeal can be made to
Principal Secretary, Technical Education, Rajasthan, Jaipur


13.3 With relation to training imparted to public:


Training programmes: 27 types of engg., 09 types of non-engg. are run in the
Co-ed. Polytechnic Colleges / Women Polytechnic Colleges of the State.
Detailed information can be obtained from the Department Website.


Time period for Training Programmes / Schemes: 2 to 3 Years


Objective of training: To make the students technically qualified for self and wage
Employment


Financial and other form of help (If any):
Exemption from tuition fee for SC/ST candidates and women as per government
rules.


Arrangement made by the Department of Technical Education, Rajasthan for
creating public awareness about the training programmes:
Special career guidance in schools, fairs, news papers, exhibitions


Process to inform the trainee about the training schedule:
Notice board of Polytechnic colleges and DTE, News Papers, Web site of
department of technical education, Rajasthan


13.4 Details of any other public services provided by the Department of
Technical Education, Rajasthan:


Training to youth under the newly launched scheme - Community
Development through Polytechnics for self- employment.